Custom Packages
===============

The following instructions assume you are building from an official
`release tarball <https://github.com/zfsonlinux/zfs/releases/latest>`__
(version 0.8.0 or newer) or directly from the `git
repository <https://github.com/zfsonlinux/zfs>`__. Most users should not
need to do this and should preferentially use the distribution packages.
As a general rule the distribution packages will be more tightly
integrated, widely tested, and better supported. However, if your
distribution of choice doesn't provide packages, or you're a developer
and want to roll your own, here's how to do it.

The first thing to be aware of is that the build system is capable of
generating several different types of packages. Which type of package
you choose depends on what's supported on your platform and exactly what
your needs are.

-  **DKMS** packages contain only the source code and scripts for
   rebuilding the kernel modules. When the DKMS package is installed
   kernel modules will be built for all available kernels. Additionally,
   when the kernel is upgraded new kernel modules will be automatically
   built for that kernel. This is particularly convenient for desktop
   systems which receive frequent kernel updates. The downside is that
   because the DKMS packages build the kernel modules from source a full
   development environment is required which may not be appropriate for
   large deployments.

-  **kmods** packages are binary kernel modules which are compiled
   against a specific version of the kernel. This means that if you
   update the kernel you must compile and install a new kmod package. If
   you don't frequently update your kernel, or if you're managing a
   large number of systems, then kmod packages are a good choice.

-  **kABI-tracking kmod** Packages are similar to standard binary kmods
   and may be used with Enterprise Linux distributions like Red Hat and
   CentOS. These distributions provide a stable kABI (Kernel Application
   Binary Interface) which allows the same binary modules to be used
   with new versions of the distribution provided kernel.

By default the build system will generate user packages and both DKMS
and kmod style kernel packages if possible. The user packages can be
used with either set of kernel packages and do not need to be rebuilt
when the kernel is updated. You can also streamline the build process by
building only the DKMS or kmod packages as shown below.

Be aware that when building directly from a git repository you must
first run the *autogen.sh* script to create the *configure* script. This
will require installing the GNU autotools packages for your
distribution. To perform any of the builds, you must install all the
necessary development tools and headers for your distribution.

It is important to note that if the development kernel headers for the
currently running kernel aren't installed, the modules won't compile
properly.

-  `Red Hat, CentOS and Fedora <#red-hat-centos-and-fedora>`__
-  `Debian and Ubuntu <#debian-and-ubuntu>`__

RHEL, CentOS and Fedora
-----------------------

Make sure that the required packages are installed to build the latest
ZFS 0.8 release:

-  **RHEL/CentOS 7**:

.. code:: sh

   sudo yum install epel-release gcc make autoconf automake libtool rpm-build dkms libtirpc-devel libblkid-devel libuuid-devel libudev-devel openssl-devel zlib-devel libaio-devel libattr-devel elfutils-libelf-devel kernel-devel-$(uname -r) python python2-devel python-setuptools python-cffi libffi-devel

-  **RHEL/CentOS 8, Fedora**:

.. code:: sh

   sudo dnf install gcc make autoconf automake libtool rpm-build kernel-rpm-macros dkms libtirpc-devel libblkid-devel libuuid-devel libudev-devel openssl-devel zlib-devel libaio-devel libattr-devel elfutils-libelf-devel kernel-devel-$(uname -r) python3 python3-devel python3-setuptools python3-cffi libffi-devel

`Get the source code <#get-the-source-code>`__.

DKMS
~~~~

Building rpm-based DKMS and user packages can be done as follows:

.. code:: sh

   $ cd zfs
   $ ./configure
   $ make -j1 rpm-utils rpm-dkms
   $ sudo yum localinstall *.$(uname -p).rpm *.noarch.rpm

kmod
~~~~

The key thing to know when building a kmod package is that a specific
Linux kernel must be specified. At configure time the build system will
make an educated guess as to which kernel you want to build against.
However, if configure is unable to locate your kernel development
headers, or you want to build against a different kernel, you must
specify the exact path with the *--with-linux* and *--with-linux-obj*
options.

.. code:: sh

   $ cd zfs
   $ ./configure
   $ make -j1 rpm-utils rpm-kmod
   $ sudo yum localinstall *.$(uname -p).rpm

kABI-tracking kmod
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The process for building kABI-tracking kmods is almost identical to for
building normal kmods. However, it will only produce binaries which can
be used by multiple kernels if the distribution supports a stable kABI.
In order to request kABI-tracking package the *--with-spec=redhat*
option must be passed to configure.

**NOTE:** This type of package is not available for Fedora.

.. code:: sh

   $ cd zfs
   $ ./configure --with-spec=redhat
   $ make -j1 rpm-utils rpm-kmod
   $ sudo yum localinstall *.$(uname -p).rpm

Debian and Ubuntu
-----------------

Make sure that the required packages are installed:

.. code:: sh

   sudo apt install build-essential autoconf automake libtool gawk alien fakeroot dkms libblkid-dev uuid-dev libudev-dev libssl-dev zlib1g-dev libaio-dev libattr1-dev libelf-dev linux-headers-$(uname -r) python3 python3-dev python3-setuptools python3-cffi libffi-dev

`Get the source code <#get-the-source-code>`__.

.. _kmod-1:

kmod
~~~~

The key thing to know when building a kmod package is that a specific
Linux kernel must be specified. At configure time the build system will
make an educated guess as to which kernel you want to build against.
However, if configure is unable to locate your kernel development
headers, or you want to build against a different kernel, you must
specify the exact path with the *--with-linux* and *--with-linux-obj*
options.

.. code:: sh

   $ cd zfs
   $ ./configure --enable-systemd
   $ make -j1 deb-utils deb-kmod
   $ for file in *.deb; do sudo gdebi -q --non-interactive $file; done

.. _dkms-1:

DKMS
~~~~

Building deb-based DKMS and user packages can be done as follows:

.. code:: sh

   $ sudo apt-get install dkms
   $ cd zfs
   $ ./configure --enable-systemd
   $ make -j1 deb-utils deb-dkms
   $ for file in *.deb; do sudo gdebi -q --non-interactive $file; done

Get the Source Code
-------------------

Released Tarball
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The released tarball contains the latest fully tested and released
version of ZFS. This is the preferred source code location for use in
production systems. If you want to use the official released tarballs,
then use the following commands to fetch and prepare the source.

.. code:: sh

   $ wget http://archive.zfsonlinux.org/downloads/zfsonlinux/zfs/zfs-x.y.z.tar.gz
   $ tar -xzf zfs-x.y.z.tar.gz

Git Master Branch
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Git *master* branch contains the latest version of the software, and
will probably contain fixes that, for some reason, weren't included in
the released tarball. This is the preferred source code location for
developers who intend to modify ZFS. If you would like to use the git
version, you can clone it from Github and prepare the source like this.

.. code:: sh

   $ git clone https://github.com/zfsonlinux/zfs.git
   $ cd zfs
   $ ./autogen.sh

Once the source has been prepared you'll need to decide what kind of
packages you're building and jump the to appropriate section above. Note
that not all package types are supported for all platforms.
